---
title: >
  Revolution,the new "Grand Bargain."
description: >
  "The basis of our form of government is the right of the people to make and to alter their constitutions of government."G.Washington
langCode: en
articleID: XKBgJoPRG2sGRcIa4J4edl7IzUTZHOC1
languageCollectionID: jTPXqrqkIHpaXZgzlGyP_OTTgAoEvfu6
updatedTimestamp: 1735213061761
createdTimestamp: 1730144219194
wordCount: 936
---

Bruce Tumwesigye

To be clear, I am not a constitutional scholar nor a law expert, or a political scientist, but I am someone who has read extensively on the subject of constitutions and political systems, and it never ceases to amaze me that this simple sentence uttered by George Washington over 200 years ago, is not seared into all of our minds and our collective consciousness. The basis of our form of government is the right of the people to alter and make our constitutions of government, when done as an act of the people as a whole. That includes, oh yes and by the way, the constitution that established our current national government, which very few of us seem to like or trust these days. But let us not forget why that is. Clearly the government is failing, gigantically, historically, to secure the commons to the benefit of all. In fact, it is now scientifically established that governments failing to address the threat of climate change are now an existential threat to society if not humanity itself. That is simply unjustifiable on any legal, moral, ethical, or rational basis. These governments must be peacefully abolished and peacefully replaced with more effective and more democratic governments. Immediately. The time has long since come and gone for us to be engaged in this conversation seriously.  
  
I am not typically prone to histrionics, however in this crisis, I am convinced this right of revolution is in fact urgent, and becoming more and more urgent every hour. There is simply too much on the table already. If we do not call their bluff, this rape and pillage will never end. And let's call it what it is. The 1% seem very content to watch all this happen. It is not inevitable. The masses have not created this mess. These elite rulers must be peacefully removed from influence and power, and a new system, based on cooperation and our mutual well-being, must be established to restore balance with the natural systems we depend upon for life and meaning. I believe the vast majority of human beings already agree. We must learn to live anew, and it will not come easily. We must do this globally, by organizing to change our governments, fundamentally. That is what is required of democratic citizens, as humans, living in a free society. Daunting as that may sound, all that begins by convention, a relatively misunderstood process.  
  
In my studies, I have discovered that there are 3 roots for the tree of liberty, just as there are the three branches of government. Those 3 roots are Convention, Debate, and a Vote. This process, peaceful political revolution, was first employed in 1787 by, yes, none other than the framers. Not one drop of blood was spilled, yet they entirely, and illegally, replaced the Articles of Convention with a new Constitution, and they did it in 4 months, with only a few years for full ratification. It was a much less democratic form of government indeed. The history is well known and deeply troubling to most scholars. Erwin Chermerinsky, Dean of Law at U.C. Berkeley, has recently come out with a book titled, "No Democracy Last's Forever." In it, he identifies the undemocratic aspects of our Constitution, why they are becoming more undemocratic, and what we the people can and must do to fully democratize our Constitution. The United States needs a new fully effective and fully democratic Constitution, one designed for our times, our needs, our vision of the future. One for the majority, not the minority of ruling elites we have today. It is the same in the UK, Russia, China and India. What is required is a global democracy spring. Easy as pie, right?  
  
Conventions are a "grand bargain," as described by George Van Cleve in his book, Making a New American Constitution. In it Van Cleve presents a simple and straightforward way to establish a new Constitutional Convention Coordinating Committee, or CCCC, for the purpose of managing a process to hold the convention, perhaps even setting guidelines for it. Raising money, education, public engagement, etc are also discussed in detail. Basically, he is saying the American people must make a new Grand Bargain for the good of their society, and I would argue that the debate part is really the most critical part. Without a clear objective and analysis of the problem, no solution will truly last, nor be accepted by the vast majority of the country. And why should it be? The debate in my view should be limited to making our government fully democratic, and fully effective, one that gives meaningful representation to a clear majority of American citizens, who establish policy and who actually govern, as they should, as in any so-called "democracy," let alone the most powerful one. The objective should be in my view to empower a true majority of Americans to control their future. The U.S. currently ranks 29th globally. Minority rule has failed. This is totally unacceptable.  
  
There is a lot to discuss about any new constitution indeed. I have a working model, as do others. They can all be helpful on some level, but in the end, this will have to be about the citizenry. Minority rule has utterly failed. True majoritarian rule should be the aspiration, democracy demands it. I would argue we need a consensus democracy. Without substantial changes to our Constitution, the minority will continue to yield vastly more power than the majority. It's their chess board, not ours. We need to change that, and change the rules of the games as well!